= enumerated_attribute

Easily code enumerations for your models and expose them as  
drop-down lists with the +enum_select+ helper, or use any of +enumerated_attribute+ 
features to simplify coding enumerations in any Ruby object.

== Resources

Development

* http://github.com/jeffp/enumerated_attribute

Source

* git://github.com/jeffp/enumerated_attribute.git

Install

* sudo gem install enumerated_attribute

== Notice

* Rails 3 ... dynamic finders working... should be rails3 ready.  We are completing form tests.

* Rails 2.3.8 breaks find_or_create_by_... and find_or_initialize_by_... methods.  Write me if you gotta have it... otherwise happy Rails3.

* Write cleaner code ... implement state patterns for your enumerated attributes (enumerated_state[http://github.com/jeffp/enumerated_state])

== How to submit an Issue

If something needs fixed, please submit issues to this Github project in the Issues tab and
provide a series of FAILING RSPEC tests that I can drop into the current RSpec
test framework and run with little to no coersing.  Thanks.

== Contributors

* Lailson Bandeira - Rails 3 updates
	
== Description

Typically, in Ruby, enumerated attributes are implemented with strings, symbols or constants.  Often the 
developer is burdened with repeatedly defining common methods in support of each
attribute.  +enumerated_attribute+ provides a DRY implementation for enumerations in Rails.  
Repetitive code such as initializers, accessors, predicate and enumeration methods are automatically generated
along with the following features:

* ActiveRecord integration
* ActionView form helpers
* Scaffold generator integration
* Definable enumeration labels
* Enum helper methods
* Dynamic predicate methods
* Initialization
* State pattern support (enumerated_state[http://github.com/jeffp/enumerated_state])

== Setup

For a Ruby application, install the gem and require it 

  require 'enumerated_attribute'

or for a rails application configure the gem in the config block of the
config/environment.rb file

  config.gem "enumerated_attribute"

and run the gem install rake task

  rake gems:install


== Rails Example

Here's an example of +enumerated_attribute+ features in a Rails application:

In the migration, declare your enumeration attributes with +enum+

  create_table :users, :force=>true do |t|
    t.string :first_name
    t.enum :gender
    t.enum :degree
    ...
  end

Define the enumerations in your models with +enum_attr+

  class User < ActiveRecord::Base
    enum_attr :gender, %w(male female)
    enum_attr :degree, %w(^none high_school college graduate)
  end

Expose the enumeration in your forms with +enum_select+

  <% form_for :user do |f| %>
    <%= f.label :user %> <%= f.text_field :first_name %><br/>
    <%= f.label :gender %> <%= f.enum_select :gender %><br/>
    <%= f.label :degree %> <%= f.enum_select :degree %><br/>
    <%= submit_tag 'save' %>
  <% end %>

or generate a scaffold with one of your favorite scaffold generators.  Currently
supports most scaffold generators including scaffold, wizardly_scaffold, nifty_scaffold, rspec_scaffold, and haml_scaffold.
See the section 'Generating Scaffolds' below.

The select options text can be customized.  See 'Customizing Labels' in the Integration section.

== Ruby Example

Here's an example of +enumerated_attribute+ features in a Ruby application:

  require 'enumerated_attribute'
  
  class Tractor
    enum_attr :gear, %w(reverse ^neutral first second over_drive)
		
  end
  
  t = Tractor.new
  t.gear                            # => :neutral
  t.neutral?                        # => true
  t.gear_next                       # => :first
  t.not_neutral?                    # => true
  t.gear_previous                   # => :neutral
  t.gear = :second                  # => :second
  t.gear_is_not_in_first?           # => true

An explanation of the above features and their usage follows.

== Usage

=== Defining the Attribute

Defining an enumerated attribute is as simple as this:

  require 'enumerated_attribute'
  
  class Tractor
    enumerated_attribute :gear, %w(reverse neutral first second over_drive)
    
    def initialize
      @gear = :neutral
    end
  end

Notice the plugin +enumerated_attribute+ is required at the top of the code.  
The +require+ line must be added at least once at some point in the code.  
It is not included in subsequent examples.

The above code uses +enumerated_attribute+ to define an attribute named 'gear' with five enumeration values.  
In general, +enumerated_attribute+ takes three parameters: the name of the attribute, an array of 
enumeration values (either symbols or strings), and an optional hash of options (not shown above).  The complete 
form of +enumerated_attribute+ looks like this:

  enumerated_attribute :name, array_of_enumerations, hash_of_options
  
Defining the attribute :gear has done a number things.  
It has generated an instance variable '@gear', read/write accessors for the 
attribute and support methods
for the enumeration, such as incrementor and decrementor methods.  These methods are 
demonstrated below using the Tractor class above:

  Tractor.instance_methods(false)
  # =>["gear", "gear=", "gears", "gear_next", "gear_previous", ...

  t = Tractor.new
  t.gear                            # => :neutral
  t.gear = :reverse                 # => :reverse
  t.gear                            # => :reverse
  t.gear = :third
  # => ArgumentError: 'third' is not an enumerated value for gear attribute
  
  t.gears                           # => [:reverse, :neutral, :first, :second, :over_drive]
  t.gear_next                       # => :neutral
  t.gear_previous                   # => :reverse
  t.gear_previous                   # => :over_drive
  
The plugin has defined +gear+ and gear= accessors for the attribute.  They can be used 
to set the attribute to one of the defined enumeration values.  Attempting to set the 
attribute to something besides a defined enumeration value raises an ArgumentError.

+gear_next+ and +gear_previous+ are incrementors and decrementors of the attribute.  
The increment order is based on the order of the enumeration values in the attribute definition.
Both the incrementor and decrementor will wrap when reaching the boundary elements 
of the enumeration array.  For example:

  t.gear = :second
  t.gear_next                       # => :over_drive
  t.gear_next                       # => :reverse


==== Dynamically-Generating Predicates Methods

Predicate methods are methods that query the state of the attribute, 
for instance, gear_is_neutral? is a predicate method that returns 'true' if 
the gear attribute is in the :neutral state.  
By default, predicate methods are not predefined, instead, they are dynamically generated.  
The plugin will evaluate and respond to methods adhering to a format that it 
can associate with an attribute name and one of the attribute's enumeration values.  
+enumerated_attribute+ recognizes predicate methods of the following format:

  {attribute name}_{anything}_{enumeration value}?

The predicate method must satisfy three requirements:  it must begin with the name 
of the attribute,
it must end with a question mark, and the question mark must be preceded with
a valid enumeration value (all connected by underscores without colons).  
So we can write the following two predicate methods without any prior definition and 
the plugin will recognize, define and respond to them as demonstrated here:

  t.gear= :neutral
  t.gear_is_in_neutral?             # => true
  t.gear_is_in_reverse?             # => false

The '_is_in_' part of the methods above is merely semantic but enhances 
readability.  The contents of the {anything} portion is completely
at the discretion of the developer.  However, there is one twist.  
The evaluation of a predicate method can be negated 
by including 'not' in the the middle {anything} section, such as here:

  t.gear_is_not_in_neutral?         # => false
  t.gear_is_not_in_reverse?         # => true
  
Basically, the shortest acceptable form of a predicate method is:

  t.gear_neutral?                   # => true
  t.gear_not_neutral?               # => false


==== Abbreviating Predicate Methods

In the case that an enumeration value is associated with only one 
attribute, the attribute name can be left out of the predicate method name.
The plugin will infer the attribute from the enum value in the method name.
The abbreviate format can be written like this:

  {anything}{_}{enumeration value}?
	
And results in the following possibilities:

  t.gear = :neutral
  t.neutral?                        # => true
  t.is_neutral?                     # => true
  t.not_neutral?                    # => false
  t.is_not_neutral?                 # => false
	
Calling the abbreviated form of the method containing an enumeration value
belonging to two or more attributes throws an AmbiguousMethod error.


==== Initializing Attributes

The plugin provides a few ways to eliminate setting the initial value of the attribute in
the +initialize+ method.  Two ways are demonstrated here:

  class Tractor
    enum_attr :gear, %w(reverse ^neutral first second third)
    enum_attr :front_light, %w(off low high), :init=>:off
  end
  
  t = Tractor.new
  t.gear                            # => :neutral
  t.front_light                     # => :off

*Note* +enumerated_attribute+ can be abbreviated to +enum_attr+.  The abbreviated
form will be used in subsequent examples.

The first and simplest way involves designating the initial value by 
prepending a carot '^' to one of the enumeration values in the definition.  
The plugin recognizes that the gear attribute is to be initialized to :neutral.  
Alternatively, the :init option can be used to indicate the initial value of the attribute.


==== Setting Attributes to nil

By default, the attribute setter allows nils unless the :nil option is set to false.
When :nil is set to false, the attribute may initialize to nil, but may not be set
to nil thereafter.

  class Tractor 
    enum_attr :plow, %w(up down), :nil=>false
  end
  
  t = Tractor.new
  t.plow                            # => nil
  t.plow_nil?                       # => true
  t.plow = :up                      # => :up
  t.plow_is_nil?                    # => false
  t.plow_is_not_nil?                # => true
  t.plow = nil                      # => raises error
  
Regardless of the :nil option setting, the plugin can dynamically recognize and define
predicate methods for testing 'nil' values.  The setter methods also treat empty
strings (or '') as nil values.


==== Changing Method Names

The plugin provides options for changing the method names of the enumeration accessor, incrementor
and decrementor (ie, +gears+, +gear_next+, +gear_previous+):

  class Tractor
    enum_attr :lights, %w(^off low high), :plural=>:lights_values, 
        :inc=>'lights_inc', :dec=>'lights_dec'
  end
  
  t = Tractor.new
  t.lights_values                   # => [:off, :low, :high]
  t.lights_inc                      # => :low
  t.lights_dec                      # => :off
  
By default, the plugin uses the plural of the attribute for the accessor method name of the enumeration 
values.  The pluralization uses a simple algorithm which does not support irregular forms.  In 
the case of 'lights' as an 
attribute, the default pluralization does not work, so the accessor can be changed using 
the :plural option.  Likewise, the decrementor
and incrementor have options :decrementor and :incrementor, or :inc and :dec, for changing
their method names.


=== Defining Other Methods

In the case that other methods are required to support the attribute, 
the plugin provides a short-hand for defining these methods in the 
+enumerated_attribute+ block.

  class Tractor
    enum_attr :gear, %w(reverse ^neutral first second over_drive) do
      parked? :neutral
      driving? [:first, :second, :over_drive]
    end
  end

  t = Tractor.new
  t.parked?                         # => true
  t.driving?                        # => false
  
Two predicate methods are defined for the 'gear' attribute in the above example using 
the plugin's short-hand.    
The first method, parked?, defines a method which evaluates 
the code {@gear == :neutral}.  The second method, driving?, evaluates
to true if the attribute is set to one of the enumeration values defined in the array 
[:first, :second, :over_drive].

The same short-hand can be used to define methods where the attribute 'is not' equal to the
indicated value or 'is not' included in the array of values.

  class Tractor
    enum_attr :gear, %w(reverse ^neutral first second over_drive) do
      not_parked? is_not :neutral
      not_driving? is_not [:first, :second, :over_drive]
    end
  end


==== Defining Other Methods With Blocks

For predicate methods requiring fancier logic,
a block can be used to define the method body.

  class Tractor
    enum_attr :gear, %w(reverse ^neutral first second over_drive) do
      parked? :neutral
      driving? [:first, :second, :over_drive]
    end
    enum_attr :plow, %w(^up down), :plural=>:plow_values do
      plowing? { self.gear_is_in_first? && @plow == :down }
    end
  end

Here, a method plowing? is true if the gear attribute equates to :first 
and the plow attribute is set to :down.  There is
no short-hand for the block.  The code must be complete and evaluate in 
the context of the instance.

Method definitions are not limited to predicate methods.  Other methods 
can be defined to manipulate the attributes.  Here, two methods are defined acting
as bounded incrementor and decrementor of the gear attribute.

  class Tractor
    enum_attr :gear, %w(reverse ^neutral first second over_drive) do
      parked? :neutral
      driving? [:first, :second, :over_drive]
      upshift { self.gear_is_in_over_drive? ? self.gear : self.gear_next }
      downshift { self.driving? ? self.gear_previous : self.gear }      
    end
  end
  
  t = Tractor.new
  t.gear                            # => :neutral
  10.times { t.upshift }
  t.gear                            # => :over_drive
  10.times { t.downshift }
  t.gear                            # => :neutral
  
Methods +upshift+ and +downshift+ use the automatically generated 
incrementor and decrementor as
well as a couple predicate methods.  +upshift+ increments the gear attribute until
it reaches over_drive and does not allow a wrap around.  +downshift+ decrements
until the attribute reaches neutral.

=== Integration

==== ActiveRecord integration

The plugin can be used with ActiveRecord.  Enumerated attributes may be declared on 
column attributes or as independent enumerations.  Declaring an enumerated attribute
on a column attribute will enforce the enumeration using symbols.  The 
enumerated column attribute must be declared as a STRING in the database schema.  
The enumerated attribute will be stored as a string but retrieved in code as a symbol.  The 
enumeration functionality is consistent across integrations.

  require 'enumerated_attribute'
  require 'active_record'
	
  class Order < ActiveRecord::Base	
    enum_attr :status, %w(^hold, processing, delayed, shipped)
    enum_attr :billing_status, 
      %w(^unauthorized, authorized, auth_failed, captured, capture_failed, closed)
  end
	
  o = Order.new
  o.status                          # => :hold
  o.billing_status                  # => :unauthorized
  o.save!
	
  o = Order.new(:invoice=>'43556334-W84', :status=>:processing, :billing=>:authorized)
  o.save!
  o.status                          # => :processing
  o.invoice                         # => "43556334-W84"
	

==== Labels

Each enumeration value has a corresponding text label.  The defaults are made 
up from the enumeration symbols.  For the Tractor class example:

  t=Tractor.new
  t.enums(:gear)                    # => [:reverse, :neutral, :first, :second, :over_drive]
  t.enums(:gear).labels             # => ['Reverse', 'Neutral', 'First', 'Second', 'Over drive']

The +enums(:attribute)+ method provides information about the attribute's enumerations. 
It is the same as the plural form of the attribute name.  There are several kinds
of information available from the +enums+ method.

  t=Tractor.new
  e = t.enums(:plow)                # => [:up, :down]
  e.labels                          # => ['Up', 'Down']
  e.hash                            # => {:up=>'Up', :down=>'Down'}
  e.select_options                  # => [['Up', 'up'], ['Down', 'down']]
  e.label(:up)                      # => 'Up'
  
==== Customizing Labels

Labels can be customized as shown here:

  class User < ActiveRecord::Base
    enum_attr :contact_options, %w(none phone email mail) do
      label :none=>'Please do not contact me'
      label :phone=>'I would like a representative to call me'
      label :email=>'I would like information via email'
      label :mail=>'I would like information mailed to me'
    end
  end

Likewise, the labels can be provided on the same line

  class Tractor
    enum_attr :gear, %w(reverse ^neutral first second over_drive) do
      labels :first=>'1st Gear', :second=>'2nd Gear', :over_drive=>'Over Drive'
    end
  end

==== View Helpers

There are two +enum_select+ helpers, one for use with +form_for+ and one for use without
it.  An example for form_for was given in the examples at the beginning.  Here's an
example with the +form_tag+ and a @user object.

  <% form_tag :action=>:register do %>
    <%= label_tag 'First name' %>: <%= text_field :user, :first_name %><br/>
    <%= label_tag 'Gender' %>: <%= enum_select :user, :gender %><br/>
    <%= label_tag 'Degree' %>: <%= enum_select :user, :degree %><br/>
    ...
    <%= submit_tag 'Register' %>
  <% end %>

==== Generating Scaffolds

You can generate views with enumerations using your favorite scaffold generator.  Currently
supports most scaffold generators including scaffold, wizardly_scaffold, nifty_scaffold, rspec_scaffold and haml_scaffold.
For most scaffolds there are two steps.  First, generate the scaffold views and 
migrations using the 'enum' type for enumerations

  ./script/generate scaffold contractor name:string gender:enum age:integer status:enum

Second, do not forget to add the +enum_attr+ macro to the generated model and migrate the database

  class Contractor < ActiveRecord::Base
    enum_attr :gender, %w(male female)
    enum_attr :status, %w(available unavailable)
  end
  
=== Formtastic integration

You can display the select input in a Formtastic form with a little monkey patching. First, extend Formtastic with an initializer:

    require 'formtastic'

    module Formtastic #:nodoc:
      class SemanticFormBuilder #:nodoc:
        def enum_input(method, options)
          unless options[:collection]
            enum = @object.enums(method.to_sym)
            choices = enum ? enum.select_options : []
            options[:collection] = choices
          end
          if (value = @object.__send__(method.to_sym))
            options[:selected] ||= value.to_s
          else
            options[:include_blank] ||= true
          end
          select_input(method, options)
        end
      end
    end

Then specify the input type as enum in the forms:

    form.input :gear, :as => :enum

=== Implementation Notes

==== New and Method_missing methods

The plugin chains both the 'new' and the 'method_missing' methods.  Any 'new' and 'method_missing' 
implementations in the same class declaring an enumerated_attribute should come before the 
declaration; otherwise, the 'new' and 'method_missing' implementations must chain in order to avoid 
overwriting the plugin's methods.  The best approach is shown here:

  class Soup
    def self.new(*args)
      ...
    end

    private
    def method_missing(methId, *args, &blk)
      ...
    end
		
    enum_attr temp:, %w(cold warm hot boiling)
  end

==== ActiveRecord

ActiveRecord's write_attribute and read_attribute methods do not support symbols for enumerated attributes.  


== Testing

The plugin uses RSpec and Webrat for testing.  Make sure you have the RSpec gem installed:

  gem install rspec webrat
  
To test the plugin for regular ruby objects, run:

  rake spec:object
	
Testing ActiveRecord integration requires the install of Sqlite3 and the 
sqlite3-ruby gem.  To test ActiveRecord, run:

  rake spec:ar

And for testing +enum_select+ in form views:

  rake spec:forms
	
To test all specs:

  rake spec:all


== Dependencies

* ActiveRecord (but not required)
* Sqlite3 and sqlite3-ruby gem (for testing)
